in this video let us discuss the basics of binary
search tree
So a binary search tree as you know is a
binary tree that is it can have a maximum of
two Children and the important property of a binary search
tree is that the value of left child will be
less than the value of parent and value of parent
will be less than the value of right child
So all the values in the left sub tree will
be less than the root and all the values in
the right sub tree will be greater than the root
So here we have a series of values given let us
construct a binary search tree using these values
So how can we do that let us see
We need to insert the nodes in the same order
given
So first we have to insert the first node
So insert 100 it becomes the root of the binary
search tree
Next we have 50 and is 50 less than the
root 100 yes it's
So place it as the left child and why did
we do that Remember the property of binary search
tree The value of left child will be less than
the value of parent and value of right child will
be greater than the value of parent
That's why we placed 50 as the left child of
So next we have 200 at is 200 less than
the root No
200 is actually greater than root 100 So
Place it as the right child of 100
Next we have the value 10 Travers from the root
and east then less than the root 100
Yes so go to left side
And there we have 50 again
check is 10 less than 50 against
It is So place 10th as the left child of
And next we have 60 again
Travers from the root is 60 less than the root
100 yes
So go to left side and there we have 50
again
check is 60 less than 50 no sixties actually greater
than 50 so place 60 as the right child of
And this is how we insert nodes in a binary
search tree and see you can take any node and
this order will be followed
That is value of left child less than value of
parent less than value of right child
So next we have 150
So check if 150 less than 100 No
So 150 actually greater than 100 so go
to right side and that we have 200
So check if 150 less than 200 it is
so 150 should be placed in the left sub
tree of 200
So Place it here
Next we have 300
So again start from the root is 300 less than or
greater than 100
It is greater than 100
So go to the right side and there we have
So check if 300 is less than or greater than
200 it is greater than 200
So again go to the right side and we can
place it there
So that is the logic and that is how we
can construct a binary search tree
Now what will be the structure of a single node
in a binary search tree As you can see in
a node there is a data like 100 10 200 50
etc
Also every node has a link to the left child
and it's right child
So each node in a binary search tree should have
a key which can be of any data type for
example integer
So int key should be there and also each node
points to its left child and right child
So two references must be there of our node type
So node left and node
Right
So this is our class for a node in a
binary search tree
Now let us create a node and let us name
it root so declare root and allocate memory to it
So right root equal to new node
So a node is created and we have key left
And right now we can add the data to it
So write root dot key equal to 10
So 10 will be stored in key field of root
Let us suppose this is the only node in the
tree so it has no Children
So left and right should point null
So right root dot Left equal to null and root
dot Right equal to null
So that is how we can create a node
So to allocate nodes we can simply create a constructor
inside the class
It will receive the node value as parameter and create a new binary search tree node with a given value.